Title: AIAA-2017-3927  
status: draft  

#"Evaluation of Alternative Altitude Scaling Methods for Thermal Ice Protection System in NASA Icing Research Tunnel"  


##Abstract  

>A test was conducted at NASA Icing Research Tunnel to evaluate altitude scaling methods
for thermal ice protection system. Two new scaling methods based on Weber number were
compared against a method based on Reynolds number. The results generally agreed with
the previous set of tests conducted in NRCC Altitude Icing Wind Tunnel where the three
methods of scaling were also tested and compared along with reference (altitude) icing
conditions. In those tests, the Weber number-based scaling methods yielded results much
closer to those observed at the reference icing conditions than the Reynolds number-based
icing conditions. The test in the NASA IRT used a much larger, asymmetric airfoil with an
ice protection system that more closely resembled designs used in commercial aircraft.
Following the trends observed during the AIWT tests, the Weber number based scaling
methods resulted in smaller runback ice than the Reynolds number based scaling, and the ice
formed farther upstream.
The results show that the new Weber number based scaling
methods, particularly the Weber number with water loading scaling, continue to show
promise for ice protection system development and evaluation in atmospheric icing tunnels.

##Discussion  

This is the latest of a series of studies on the test scaling of thermal systems.

It has similarities to unheated ice test scaling (see [NASA-CR-2004-212875]({filename}NASA-CR-2004-212875.md)). 
The parameter Ko is matched in both the heated and unheated methods. 
Stagnation line water catch rates and heat transfer are calculated using the same airfoil 
radius of curvature cylinder approximations. 
A weber number is matched to determine test airspeed, but different Weber numbers (We_d in unheated, We_da (We_c) in heated). 

There are significant differences. 
Stagnation line freezing fraction n_o is not matched in the heated similarity. 
Recovery temperature is matched in the heated similarity, 
while Phi is matched to determine the air temperature static temperature in the unheated similarity. 
Liquid water content is selected to match a calculated ratio of stagnation line 
water catch rate to evaporation rate, referred to as Pi3. 
So, one will not have the same test conditions for unheated and heated runs 
of the same flight or reference condition. 

Heating is adjusted to match reference surface temperatures. 
This step is empirical, as detailed below. 
So, the complete test condition is not determined in advance 
(unlike unheated similarity), but requires adjustments in test. 

[Emphasis added]
>D. Test Procedure  
For runback water to freeze in a manner similar to that at altitude, one of the conditions that needs to be met is that
model surface temperatures need to be similar to those occurring at altitude. With the IPS operating at the same heated
air mass flowrate and temperature, Reynolds number scaled conditions result in model surface temperatures nearly
identical to those during operation at altitude conditions. This is generally true for both dry air and icing conditions,
but more so for dry air. Because of this, the surface temperatures obtained at Re-scaled conditions could also be used
as reference values.  

>When operating at Weber number scaled conditions, however, convective cooling by the tunnel airstream is
elevated, resulting in a different model surface temperature profile. To compensate for the enhanced convective
cooling, IPS system output is increased in temperature, mass flow rate, or both, to obtain the correct model surface
temperature. __Therefore, Weber number scaling methods require two steps: first run at Reynolds number scaled
conditions to obtain the reference model surface temperatures, then run at Weber number scaled conditions adjusting
the IPS system to get the model surface temperatures obtained in step one. These two steps are performed with dry
air in the tunnel.__ The icing run may then commence at the Weber number scaled conditions to obtain runback icing
results similar to those that would be expected at altitude.  

>Once the IPS parameters for the test were obtained, tests were done using the various scaling methods described
in the introduction. The following describes the typical test procedure:  
>__1) Set IPS air mass flow rate and temperature to obtain “reference” (Re-scaled) model leading edge
temperature.__  
>2) Activate icing spray for a predetermined icing exposure time.  
>3) Shut tunnel down and document the ice accretion using photographs. Perform 2D ice tracings, ice
thickness measurements, and ice mass measurements. Record frozen rivulets using BIO-FOAM
impression block.  

The advantages of the WePi3 method are discussed:  

>F. Further Discussion  
Three things can happen to water striking a heated aircraft surface in flight icing conditions: it can runback and
freeze on an unheated or insufficiently heated surface, it can be re-entrained into the airstream, or it can be evaporated.
The air pressure at flight altitudes affects all three of these modes of mass transport. Reynolds number scaling provides
the surface temperature conditions for freezing of runback water, but does not provide similitude in either liquid water
re-entrainment into the airstream or evaporation. The result is a great deal more ice being frozen on the surface than
would occur at altitude conditions. Weber number based on water density scaling, in conjunction with surface
temperature matching, provides the inertia to surface tension forces ratio needed to remove much of the excess water
that is frozen in the Reynolds number scaling method. Because convective cooling is, however, much enhanced
through the elevated Reynolds number generated by this method, excess ice can still result. The Weber number based
on air density and Pi3 method seeks to simulate all three modes of mass transport. Model surface temperature matching
creates the surface condition for the ice to freeze in the proper location. Weber number based on air density matching
generates ample inertia to surface tension forces to remove liquid water as would be the case at altitude, without over-
enhancement of convective cooling through increased Reynolds number. Finally, the enhanced evaporation that
occurs at altitude due to the decreased static pressure is addressed by reducing water loading in proportion to the
reduction in calculated water evaporation rate.  

##Conclusions

[Emphasis added]
>IV. Conclusions  
A test was conducted at NASA Icing Research tunnel to evaluate altitude scaling methods for thermal ice
protection system. These methods were developed during a series of joint NASA/NRC-Canada tests at NRCC Altitude
Icing Wind Tunnel using a small symmetric airfoil model. The IRT allowed these scaling methods to be evaluated on
a larger asymmetric business jet airfoil with a more typical IPS design at higher Reynolds number.  
The results from the IRT test largely agreed with and supported the results from the AIWT tests. The We-based
scaling methods resulted in smaller runback ice mass than the Re-based scaling method. The Re-based scaling method
generated runback ice that formed farther downstream than the We-based methods. These results agreed with those
from the AIWT tests where the scale-method ice accretions were compared with reference (altitude) results. __The
Weber number based on air density coupled with surface temperature matching and water loading scaling produced
the most consistent results. While not perfect, this method appears to be the best available to scale thermal IPS icing
test conditions for altitude effects in an atmospheric icing wind tunnel.__ Moreover, they are not based on empirically-
generated scale factors, but on fundamental physics. What is left is to better determine the limits of the physical
relations used which can be accomplished by testing full-scale airfoil models in an altitude capable wind tunnel.

###Comparisons to NASA/CR-2004-212875 calculations  

I used the methods from NASA/CR-2004-212875 to calculated similarity 
parameters. 
The heated evaporation rate can also be readily calculated. 
The surface temperature required to match a Pi3 or m_w/m_e ration can also be calculated. 

There appears to be a difference in the way the We_da values are calculated. 
Using the NASA/CR-2004-212875 methods, the calculated We_da values do not match well. 

Type | We_Da (Table 3) | We_da (NASA/CR-2004-212875)
---|---|---
 Ref | 5814 | 







##Notes:  

[^1]: Lee, Sam, Addy, Harold E. Jr., Broeren, Andy P., and Orchard, David M.: 
"Evaluation of Alternative Altitude Scaling Methods for Thermal Ice Protection System in NASA Icing Research Tunnel." AIAA-2017-3927, 9th AIAA Atmospheric and Space Environments Conference. 2017.  
