title: NASA-TM-106827    
category: icing tunnels  
status: draft  

###_"This study study has established the import of correctly analyzing the leading-edge heat balance in establishing scaling methods."_  

#"Methods for Scaling Icing Test Conditions" [^1]  

##Abstract  

>This report presents the results of tests at NASA Lewis to evaluate
several methods to establish suitable alternative test conditions
when the test facility limits the model size or operating conditions.
The first method was proposed by Olsen. It can be applied when
full-size models are tested and all the desired test conditions except
liquid-water content can be obtained in the facility.
The other two
methods discussed are: a modification of the French scaling law
and the AEDC scaling method. Icing tests were made with
cylinders at both reference and scaled conditions representing
mixed and glaze ice in the NASA Lewis Icing Research Tunnel.
Reference and scale ice shapes were compared to evaluate each
method. The Olsen method was tested with liquid-water content
varying from 1.3 to .8 g/m<up>3</sup>. Over this range, ice shapes produced
using the Olsen method were unchanged. 
The modified French and
AEDC methods produced scaled ice shapes which approximated
the reference
shapes when model size was reduced to half the
reference size for the glaze-ice cases tested.

##Discussion  

##Conclusions 

>This study has established the import of correctly analyzing 
the leading-edge heat balance in establishing scaling methods. The
Olsen method introduced a heat-balance analysis to correct
temperature when the only scale test parameter which cannot be
matched to the reference is LWC. The ice shapes which resulted
when the Olsen method was applied maintained both the quantity
of ice and the shape when the liquid-water content was reduced
from 1.3 to .8 g/m3. It was shown to give a significant
in scaled ice shapes over the often-applied rule LWC
x time = constant with t<sub>s</sub> = t<sub>r</sub>.

>A modification of the French method in which a convective film
coefficient suitable for laminar flow was substituted for the original
turbulent-flow coefficient improved the ability of scaled ice shapes
to reproduce reference shapes for the conditions tested. Finally, the
AEDC method was tested. It also used a laminar-flow film
coefficient and was shown to provide a similarly-effective method
of approximating reference ice shapes.

>Although the results were encouraging, 
all of these scaling methods
need to be evaluated under a wide range of conditions and with
different geometries to fully confirm their effectiveness.  

#Citations  

NASA-TM-106827 cites 12 publications: 

- Anderson, David N.: "Rime-, Mixed- and Glaze-Ice Evaluations of Three Scaling Laws". AIAA 94-O718, January, 1994.  
- Olsen, William A.: unpublished notes.  
- Charpin, Francois, and Fasso, Guy: "Icing Testing in the Large Modane Wind Tunnel on Full Scale and Reduced Scale Models," L'Aermaufique et l'Asmmaufique, no 38, 1972. English translation published as NASA TM-75373.  
- Ruff, G.A.: "Analysis and Verification of the Icing Scaling Equations" AEDC-TR-S5-30,Vol I (Rev), March, 1986.  
- Soeder, Ronald H. and Andracchio, Charles, R., NASA: "Lewis Icing Research Tunnel User Manual," NASA TM 102319, June, 1990.  
- Ide, Robert F.: "Liquid Water Content and Droplet Size Calibration of the NASA Lewis Icing Research Tunnel," NASA TM 102447, January, 1990.  
- Messinger, B. L.: "Equilibrium Temperature of an Unheated Icing Surface a sa Function of Airspeed". J. Aeron. Sci. 20 No. 1, January, 1953, pp 29-42.  
- Langmuir, Irving and Blodgett, Katharine B.: "A Mathematical Investigation of Water Droplet Trajectories," Army Air Forces Technical Report No. 5418, February, 1946.  
- Tribus, Myron; Young, G.B.W.; and Boelter, L.M-K.: "Analysis of Heat Transfer Over a Small Cylinder in Icing Conditions on Mount Washington," Trans ASME 70, pp 971-976, 1948.  
- Pruppacher, Hans R. and Klett, James D.: Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation. Reidel, Boston, 1980.  
- Kreith, Frank: Principles of Heat Transfer, International, Scranton, 1958.  
- Shin, Jaiwon and Bond, Thomas H., "Results of an Icing Test on a NACA 0012 in the NASA Lewis Icing Research Tunnel" NASA TM-105374, AIAA 92-0647, January, 1992.  

An online search found NASA-TM-106827 cited 39 times. [^2]  

##Notes

[^1]: Anderson, David N.: Methods for Scaling Icing Test Conditions, NASA-TM-106827, AIAA-95-0540, January, 1995.  
[^2]: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C48&q=Methods+for+Scaling+Icing+Test+Conditions&btnG=  

